# Accessing Cecile

!!! note "Accessing Cecile outside the OvGU network"
    To access Cecile outside the OvGU network, you need do it via the OvGU [VPN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_private_network), please follow the URZ instructions in [here](https://www.urz.ovgu.de/en/vpn-path-204,616.html) 

=== "Linux"

    ## Accessing Cecile from Linux

    Open a terminal in your machine, then type the following command making sure to insert your correct username

    ```bash
    ssh <username>@cecile.ovgu.de
    ```

    If you want to use any software with a Graphical User Interface (GUI) in Cecile (e.g. Matlab), please use the following command known as **X fowarding**. Keep in mind that this usage mode is very sensitive to latency, thus outside the OvGU network you will likely experience a poor performance in softwares with GUI. 

    ```bash
    ssh -X <username>@cecile.ovgu.de
    ```

=== "macOS"

    ## Accessing Cecile from macOS

    Open a terminal in your machine, then type the following command making sure to insert your username

    ```bash
    ssh <username>@cecile.ovgu.de
    ```

    If you want to use any software with a Graphical User Interface (GUI) in Cecile (e.g. Matlab), you need to use the so-called **X fowarding**. Keep in mind that this usage mode is very sensitive to latency, thus outside the OvGU network you will likely experience a poor performance in softwares with GUI. 

    !!! Warning "Issues with macOS"
        X fowarding does not currently work on macOS, you need to install [XQuartz](https://www.xquartz.org/)        


    ```bash
    ssh -X <username>@cecile.ovgu.de
    ```

=== "Windows"

    ## Accessing Cecile from Windows

    **SSH option:**

    Windows 10 and 11 include now a built-in SSH client. To use it simply start a command prompt, type the following command and enter your password:

    ```
    ssh <username>@cecile.ovgu.de
    ```

    For further information about the SSH client, please take a look at the [official page](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/terminal/tutorials/ssh) 

    If you want to use any software with a Graphical User Interface (GUI) in Cecile (e.g. Matlab), you need to use the so-called **X fowarding**. Keep in mind that this usage mode is very sensitive to latency, thus outside the OvGU network you will likely experience a poor performance in softwares with GUI.

    !!! Warning "Issues with Windows"
        X fowarding does not currently work on Windows, you need to install [VcXsrv](https://github.com/marchaesen/vcxsrv)

    ```bash
    ssh -X <username>@cecile.ovgu.de
    ```

    **Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) option:**

    Starting from Windows 10 (version 2004), you can easily install in your Windows operating system a subsystem that let you run a distribution of Linux (Ubuntu as default, but you can also choose a different one).</b>  
    WSL installation is very straightforward, you can find all the necessary information in the official [microsoft page](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install)

    Once you have installed the WSL on your pc, you can easily access Cecile via SSH as we explained above.

    Using a WSL provides multiple advantages: it allows you to use a Linux environment like Cecile, without giving up your Windows operating system. Interacting with Cecile via WSL facilitates many procedures, such as file transferring from and to Cecile. Files transferred via WSL will be directly available to your Windows system. Furthermore working with the command line will surely speed up all your processes, given that you will not need to go through additional tools to interact with Cecile.

## Avoid passwords, use SSH keys


A more secure way to access Cecile is by using so called public key authentication instead of a canonical password.
In a nutshell, a criptographic algorithm creates for you a pair of keys: a **private key** and a **public key**, both of them will be stored in your machine. The private key must always be protected and not shared, while you will share the public key with the cluster administrator. See below how to set-up a pair of private/public keys.

=== "Linux/Mac"

    - Run the following command in your terminal. The key pair will be generated inside a hidden `.ssh` folder in a directory of your choice. You will be then asked to provide a **passphrase**, we strongly recommend you to set up a passphrase for further security. 

    ```bash
    ssh-keygen -t ed25519
    ```

    - Check that your keys have been generated by typing within the directory that contains the `.ssh` folder: 

    ```
    ls -l 
    ```
    You should see a similar output listing both the private key `id_ed25519` and the public key `id_ed25519.pub`
    ```
    -rw------- 1 user  464 Jun 12 17:14 id_ed25519
    -rw-r--r-- 1 user  101 Jun 12 17:14 id_ed25519.pub
    ```

    - Now that you have the key pair, you just need to provide the public key, `id_ed25519` in this case, to your cluster administrator.

    - You can now simply type the following command to access the cluster. The first time you access the cluster, you will be asked to provide the passphrase one time only.

    ```bash
    ssh <username>@cecile.ovgu.de
    ```

=== "Windows"

    !!! note "Access with WSL"
        In case you use a WSL on your Windows system, you can directly refer to the Linux/Mac section


    If you want to set up a public key authentication via a GUI, you can use [PUTTY](https://www.putty.org/), a straightforward explanation can be found in the [official microsoft page](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/viva/glint/setup/sftp-ssh-key-gen)


## Using a graphical interface 

Coming soon...