docs/open-science/research-data-management/publish.md, before:

# Publish your data

Sharing your data with the scientific community is a milestone for your research, for this reason the best way to share your data and your findings with others is to make them open, transparent and especially interoperable.

If you have followed the previous recommendations up to now, your data should be almost ready to be shared.

## Restrictions, sensitive data and legal aspects

The following are the general questions that you should ask yourself when thinking of the legal aspects of sharing your research.

- **Who does own the data generated by my research?**
- **What do I need to consider when sharing, publishing and archiving data?**
- **How do I handle data with sensitive information?**
- **Under which conditions can third-party data be re-used for my research?**

Concerning the legal aspects about copyrights and personal data protection, you can refer directly to the official documents:

Links to the official German documents.

- [Bundesdatenschutzgesetz](https://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/bdsg_2018/BJNR209710017.html)
- [Gesetz über Urheberrecht und verwandte Schutzrechte](https://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/urhg/)

Links to the official English translation.

- [Act on Copyright and Related Rights](https://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/englisch_urhg/englisch_urhg.html)
- [Federal Data Protection Act](https://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/englisch_bdsg/)
- [European data protection law](https://gdpr-info.eu/)

## Where to share your data

There are multiple platforms to make your data public, here just a few of the most popular ones:

- [Open Science Framework](https://osf.io/)
- [Figshare](https://figshare.com/)
- [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/)
- [RDC at ZPID](https://rdc-psychology.org/)
- [OpenNeuro](https://openneuro.org/)(Intended only for neuroscientific data)

If you expect and whish other people to have a more interactive and collaborative approach to your code
consider to share it also in other platforms such as Github, Gitlab or Bitbucket. Refer to the section about [code sharing].
[code sharing]: ../../code-management/sharing
 
## Pre-registration

Pre-registration is a relatively recent approach to do research, it is based on the assumption that registering in advance, to a dedicated platform, a detailed plan of the experimental and analysis procedure one would follow, it would contribute to a more transparent and reproducible science.

One of the fundamental aspects of pre-registration is a clear distinction between **confirmatory-hypothesis** and **exploratory-hypothesis**, or in other words the distinction between the hypothesis put forward before data collection, the prediction,  and the exploratory post-hoc hypothesis, the postdiction. Pre-gistration does not favor one or the other hypothesis, as it should be, it considers both fundamental for the advancement of science, but it requires a net distinction when data and results are published.

For a more comprehensive presentation of pre-registration refer to [Nosek et al, 2018](https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.1708274114).

You can pre-register your research in the [center for open science](https://www.cos.io/initiatives/prereg) website.

## Registered reports

A registered report is an alternative publishing approach that consists of pre-registering and submitting to peer-review a protocol of a study you would like to conduct. This approach aims at enhancing results replicability by ensuring that rigorous methods are followed, that experiments do not suffer from low statistical power and by preventing results selection.

#### General procedure for registered reports

- A detailed protocol (including introduction, methods, planned analysis and pilot data) of a study you intend to conduct is submitted to a journal.
- If the protocol meets the journal criteria it is then submitted to a peer-review process.
- If reviewers and editors accept your protocol, your study can actually start and it must be conducted by following rigorously the agreed protocol.
- At this stage your study is in principle accepted for publication, as long as the approved protocol has been strictly followed.
- The study with a complete manuscript (previous introduction, data analysis and results) plus an additional exploratory analysis section is then resubmitted and goes again through the peer-review process.
- If the manuscripts is accepted the article is published and data and code are usually made publically available.

Commit message:

Fix typo and make a note for code sharing

docs/open-science/research-data-management/publish.md, after:

# Publish your data

Sharing your data with the scientific community is a milestone for your research, for this reason the best way to share your data and your findings with others is to make them open, transparent and especially interoperable.

If you have followed the previous recommendations up to now, your data should be almost ready to be shared.

## Restrictions, sensitive data and legal aspects

The following are the general questions that you should ask yourself when thinking of the legal aspects of sharing your research.

- **Who does own the data generated by my research?**
- **What do I need to consider when sharing, publishing and archiving data?**
- **How do I handle data with sensitive information?**
- **Under which conditions can third-party data be re-used for my research?**

Concerning the legal aspects about copyrights and personal data protection, you can refer directly to the official documents:

Links to the official German documents.

- [Bundesdatenschutzgesetz](https://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/bdsg_2018/BJNR209710017.html)
- [Gesetz über Urheberrecht und verwandte Schutzrechte](https://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/urhg/)

Links to the official English translation.

- [Act on Copyright and Related Rights](https://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/englisch_urhg/englisch_urhg.html)
- [Federal Data Protection Act](https://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/englisch_bdsg/)
- [European data protection law](https://gdpr-info.eu/)

## Where to share your data

There are multiple platforms to make your data public, here just a few of the most popular ones:

- [Open Science Framework](https://osf.io/)
- [Figshare](https://figshare.com/)
- [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/)
- [RDC at ZPID](https://rdc-psychology.org/) (Intended only for psychogy/neuroscience data)
- [OpenNeuro](https://openneuro.org/) (Intended only for neuroscientific data)

!!! note "Sharing code for your publication"
    If you expect and whish other people to have a more interactive and collaborative approach to the code of your paper,
    consider to share it also on other platforms such as Github, Gitlab or Bitbucket. Refer to the section about [code sharing].
    [code sharing]: ../../code-management/sharing
 
## Pre-registration

Pre-registration is a relatively recent approach to do research, it is based on the assumption that registering in advance, to a dedicated platform, a detailed plan of the experimental and analysis procedure one would follow, it would contribute to a more transparent and reproducible science.

One of the fundamental aspects of pre-registration is a clear distinction between **confirmatory-hypothesis** and **exploratory-hypothesis**, or in other words the distinction between the hypothesis put forward before data collection, the prediction,  and the exploratory post-hoc hypothesis, the postdiction. Pre-gistration does not favor one or the other hypothesis, as it should be, it considers both fundamental for the advancement of science, but it requires a net distinction when data and results are published.

For a more comprehensive presentation of pre-registration refer to [Nosek et al, 2018](https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.1708274114).

You can pre-register your research in the [center for open science](https://www.cos.io/initiatives/prereg) website.

## Registered reports

A registered report is an alternative publishing approach that consists of pre-registering and submitting to peer-review a protocol of a study you would like to conduct. This approach aims at enhancing results replicability by ensuring that rigorous methods are followed, that experiments do not suffer from low statistical power and by preventing results selection.

#### General procedure for registered reports

- A detailed protocol (including introduction, methods, planned analysis and pilot data) of a study you intend to conduct is submitted to a journal.
- If the protocol meets the journal criteria it is then submitted to a peer-review process.
- If reviewers and editors accept your protocol, your study can actually start and it must be conducted by following rigorously the agreed protocol.
- At this stage your study is in principle accepted for publication, as long as the approved protocol has been strictly followed.
- The study with a complete manuscript (previous introduction, data analysis and results) plus an additional exploratory analysis section is then resubmitted and goes again through the peer-review process.
- If the manuscripts is accepted the article is published and data and code are usually made publically available.
